Introduce a dart create page (#3352)
dart-lang/site-www: src/tools/dart-create.md

---
title: dart create
description: Command-line tool for creating Dart projects.
toc: false
---

The `dart create` command allows creating Dart projects
from varying available templates through a command line
or many IDE project creation workflows.

{% include tools/dart-tool-note.md %}

The command creates a directory with the specified name, 
creates necessary files, configures static analysis, 

> and retrieves any necessary dependencies.

Reviewer: I'd like the first screenful to show or hint at the commands that people are most likely to use — more like https://dart.dev/tools/dart-analyze. Maybe something like this:

-------------

When you run `dart create`, it first creates a directory with the project files. Then it gets package dependencies (unless you specify the `--no-pub` flag.) Here's an example of using `dart create` to create a directory named `my_cli` that contains a simple console app (the default template):

```terminal
$ dart create my_cli
```

To use a different template, add a template argument:

```terminal
$ dart create -t web-simple my_web_app
```

The following table shows the templates you can use:
...

```terminal
$ dart create [ARGUMENTS] <DIRECTORY>
```

{{site.alert.note}}
  The command will attempt to run [`dart pub get`](/tools/pub/cmd/pub-get) 
  after the project is created.

  To avoid this you can specify the `--no-pub` flag:

  ```terminal
  $ dart create --no-pub <DIRECTORY>
  ```

> {{site.alert.end}}

Reviewer: This doesn't seem crucial enough to go above the fold. What do you think of deleting this note in favor of the `--no-pub` mention above?

The file structure created and the dependencies specified
are configured through a choice of templates. By default, 
the `console-simple` template is used, 
creating a simple command-line application.

To use that default template and create an application with
the package and directory name `my_cli`, run the following command:

```terminal
$ dart create my_cli
```

This and the other templates, result in a file structure being created
which follows the guidelines and suggestions
outlined in [Package layout conventions](/tools/pub/package-layout).

To instead utilize one of the other templates, 
specify its id with the `-t` flag:

```terminal
$ dart create -t <TEMPLATE> <DIRECTORY>
```

Beyond the `console-simple` template, these are the currently available
templates:

|------------------+---------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------|

> | Template         | Example of use                              | More information                                     |

Reviewer: I think we can drop the second (example of use) column.

|------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| `console-simple` | `dart create -t console-simple <DIRECTORY>` | A simple command-line application.                   |
| `console-full`   | `dart create -t console-full <DIRECTORY>`   | A complete command-line application.                 |
| `package-simple` | `dart create -t package-simple <DIRECTORY>` | A starting point for Dart libraries or applications. |
| `server-shelf`   | `dart create -t server-shelf <DIRECTORY>`   | A server application built using [shelf][].          |
| `web-simple`     | `dart create -t web-simple <DIRECTORY>`     | A web application built using core Dart libraries.   |
{:.table .table-striped .nowrap}

[shelf]: {{site.pub-pkg}}/shelf

As an example, to create a simple web application
with the directory and name `my_web_app`,
you can run the following command:

```terminal
$ dart create -t web-simple my_web_app
```

> If the specified directory already exists, the command will fail. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the specified directory already exists, the command fails. 
```

(We try to keep to [present tense](https://developers.google.com/style/tense).)

  after the project is created.

  To avoid this you can specify the `--no-pub` flag:

  ```terminal
  $ dart create --no-pub <DIRECTORY>
  ```
{{site.alert.end}}

The file structure created and the dependencies specified
are configured through a choice of templates. By default, 
the `console-simple` template is used, 
creating a simple command-line application.

To use that default template and create an application with
the package and directory name `my_cli`, run the following command:

```terminal
$ dart create my_cli
```

This results in a package structure similar to the following:

```bash
my_cli/                  # The projects parent directory
  bin/                   # The bin directory for the CLI tools
  .gitignore             # Prevents various Dart files from being added to Git staging
  analysis_options.yaml  # Configures static analysis for the project
  CHANGELOG.md           # Allows you to specify changes between releases
  pubspec.lock           # Pins down the dependency information for your package
  pubspec.yaml           # Configures package information and dependencies
  README.md              # Provides a description for your application

> ```

Author: Do you think it's worth having an example outlining a created file structure like this? With the comments and everything?

Reviewer: I'd prefer to have a link or a shared graphic/text. That makes it less likely that the info will get out of date.

Author: Good point, I've instead consolidated this part to a link to existing package conventions. I wasn't so confident on the wording though, so open to suggestions. Thanks!

---
title: dart create
description: Command-line tool for creating Dart projects.
toc: false
---

The `dart create` command creates a Dart project,
using one of several supported templates.
The same functionality is available in IDEs.

{% include tools/dart-tool-note.md %}

When you run `dart create`, it first creates a directory with the project files. 

> Then it gets package dependencies (unless you specify the `--no-pub` flag.) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then it gets package dependencies (unless you specify the `--no-pub` flag).
```

Here's an example of using `dart create` to create a directory named `my_cli` 
that contains a simple console app (the default template):

```terminal
$ dart create my_cli
```

To use a different template, such as `web-simple`, add a template argument:

```terminal
$ dart create -t web-simple my_web_app
```

The following table shows the templates you can use:

|------------------+------------------------------------------------------|
| Template         | Description                                          |
|------------------|------------------------------------------------------|

> | `console-simple` | A simple command-line application.                   |

Reviewer: Google style is to [use _app_ instead of _application_](https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#app) except where you want to convey complexity. Also, I wanted to make clear that console-simple is the default.

```suggestion
| `console-simple` | A simple command-line app (the default template).                   |
```

> | `console-full`   | A complete command-line application.                 |
> | `package-simple` | A starting point for Dart libraries or applications. |
> | `server-shelf`   | A server application built using [shelf][].          |
> | `web-simple`     | A web application built using core Dart libraries.   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `console-full`   | A complete command-line app.                 |
| `package-simple` | A starting point for Dart libraries or apps. |
| `server-shelf`   | A server built using [shelf][].          |
| `web-simple`     | A web app built using core Dart libraries.   |
```

{:.table .table-striped .nowrap}

[shelf]: {{site.pub-pkg}}/shelf

> These templates result in a file structure being created
> which follows the guidelines and suggestions
> outlined in [Package layout conventions](/tools/pub/package-layout).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These templates result in a file structure that follows
[package layout conventions](/tools/pub/package-layout).
```
